doc/usage.md, before:

# vfkit Command Line

The `vfkit` executable can be used to create a virtual machine (VM) using macOS virtualization framework.
The virtual machine will be terminated as soon as the `vfkit` process exits.
Its configuration can be specified through command line options.

Specifying VM bootloader configuration is mandatory.
Device configuration is optional, but most VM will need a disk image and a network interface to be configured.

## Generic Options

- `--log-level`

Set the log-level for VFKit.  Supported values are `debug`, `info`, and `error`.

- `--restful-URI`

The URI (address) of the restful service.  The default is `tcp://localhost:8081`.  Valid schemes are
`tcp`, `none`, or `unix`.  In the case of unix, the "host" portion would be a path to where the unix domain
socket will be stored. A scheme of `none` disables the restful service.

### Virtual Machine Resources

These options specify the amount of RAM and the number of CPUs which will be available to the virtual machine.
They are mandatory.

- `--cpus`

Number of virtual CPUs (vCPU) available in the VM. It defaults to 1 vCPU.

- `--memory`

Amount of memory available in the virtual machine. The value is in MiB (mibibytes, 1024 * 1024 * 1024 bytes), and the default is 512 MiB.

### Time Synchronization Configuration

#### Description

When the host system is suspended, the guest clock stops running, and it's unable to get back to the correct time upon resume.
The `--timesync` option can be used to let `vfkit` set the guest clock to the correct time when it detects the host.
At the moment, this can only be done using `qemu-guest-agent`, which has to be installed in the guest.
It must be configured to communicate over virtio-vsock.

#### Arguments
- `vsockPort`: vsock port used for communication with the guest agent.


## Bootloader Configuration

A bootloader is required to tell vfkit _how_ it should be starting the guest OS.

### Linux bootloader

#### Description

`--bootloader linux` replaces the legacy `--kernel`, `--kernel-cmdline` and `--initrd` options.
It allows to specify which kernel and initrd should be used when starting the VM.

#### Arguments

- `kernel`: path to the kernel to use to start the virtual machine. The kernel *must* be uncompressed or the VM will hang when trying to start. See [the kernel documentation](https://www.kernel.org/doc/Documentation/arm64/booting.txt) for more details.
- `initrd`: path to the initrd file to use when starting the virtual machine.
- `cmdline`: kernel command line to use when starting the virtual machine.

#### Example

`--bootloader linux,kernel=~/kernels/vmlinuz-5.18.18-200.fc36.aarch64,initrd=~/kernels/initramfs-5.18.18-200.fc36.aarch64.img,cmdline="\"console=hvc0 root=UUID=164b4fc3-dc5a-40ea-a40b-c689a7bf41cf rw\""`

The kernel command line must be enclosed in `"`, and depending on your shell, they might need to be escaped (`\"`)


### EFI bootloader

#### Description

`--bootloader efi` is only available when running on macOS 13 or newer.
This allows to boot a disk image using EFI, which removes the need for providing external kernel/initrd/...
The disk image bootloader will be started by the EFI firmware, which will in turn know which kernel it should be booting.

#### Arguments

- `variable-store`: path to a file which EFI can use to store its variables
- `create`: indicate whether the `variable-store` file should be created or not if missing.

#### Example

`--bootloader efi,variable-store=/Users/virtuser/efi-variable-store,create`


### Deprecated options

#### Description

The `--kernel`, `--initrd` and `--kernel-cmdline` options are deprecated and have been replaced by the more generic `--bootloader` option.

#### Options

- `--kernel`

Path to the kernel to use to start the virtual machine. The kernel *must* be uncompressed or the VM will hang when trying to start.
See [the kernel documentation](https://www.kernel.org/doc/Documentation/arm64/booting.txt) for more details.

- `--initrd`

Path to the initrd file to use when starting the virtual machine.

- `--kernel-cmdline`

Kernel command line to use when starting the virtual machine.


## Device Configuration

Various devices can be added to the virtual machines. They are all paravirtualized devices using VirtIO. They are grouped under the `--device` commande line flag.


### Disk

#### Description

The `--device virtio-blk` option adds a disk to the virtual machine. The disk is backed by an image file on the host machine. This file is a raw image file.
See also [vz/CreateDiskImage](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/Code-Hex/vz/v3#CreateDiskImage).


#### Thin images

Apple Virtualization Framework only support raw disk images and ISO images.
There is no support for thin image formats such as [qcow2](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Qcow).

However, APFS, the default macOS filesystem has support for sparse files and copy-on-write files, so it offers the main features of thin image format.

A sparse raw image can be created/expanded using the `truncate` command or
using
[`truncate(2)`](https://manpagez.com/man/2/truncate/).
For example, an empty 1GiB disk can be created with `truncate --size 1G
vfkit.img`. Such an image will only use disk space when content is written to
it. It initially only uses a few bytes of actual disk space even if it's size
is 1G.

A copy-on-write image is a raw image file which references a backing file. Its
initial content is the same as its backing file, and the data is shared with
the backing file. This means the copy-on-write image does not use extra disk
space when it's created. When this image is modified, the changes will only be
made to the copy-on-write image, and not to the backing file. Only the
modified data will use actual disk space.
A copy-on-write image can be created using `cp -c` or [clonefile(2)](http://www.manpagez.com/man/2/clonefile/).


#### Arguments
- `path`: the absolute path to the disk image file.
- `deviceId`: `/dev/disk/by-id/` identifier to use for this device.

#### Example

This adds a virtio-blk device to the VM which will be backed by the raw image at `/Users/virtuser/vfkit.img`:
```
--device virtio-blk,path=/Users/virtuser/vfkit.img
```


### USB Mass Storage

#### Description

The `--device usb-mass-storage` option adds a USB mass storage device to the virtual machine. The disk is backed by an image file on the host machine. This file is a raw image file or an ISO image.

#### Arguments
- `path`: the absolute path to the disk image file.

#### Example

This adds a USB mass storage device to the VM which will be backed by the ISO image at `/Users/virtuser/distro.iso`:
```
--device usb-mass-storage,path=/Users/virtuser/distro.iso
```


### Networking

#### Description

The `--device virtio-net` option adds a network interface to the virtual machine. If it gets its IP address through DHCP, its IP can be found in `/var/db/dhcpd_leases` on the host.

#### Arguments
- `mac`: optional argument to specify the MAC address of the VM. If it's omitted, a random MAC address will be used.
- `fd`: file descriptor to attach to the guest network interface. The file descriptor must be a connected datagram socket. See [VZFileHandleNetworkDeviceAttachment](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/virtualization/vzfilehandlenetworkdeviceattachment?language=objc) for more details.
- `nat`: guest network traffic will be NAT'ed through the host. This is the default. See [VZNATNetworkDeviceAttachment](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/virtualization/vznatnetworkdeviceattachment?language=objc) for more details.
- `unixSocketPath`: path to a unix socket to attach to the guest network interface. See [VZFileHandleNetworkDeviceAttachment](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/virtualization/vzfilehandlenetworkdeviceattachment?language=objc) for more details.

`fd`, `nat`, `unixSocketPath` are mutually exclusive.

#### Example

This adds a virtio-net device to the VM with `52:54:00:70:2b:71` as its MAC address:
```
--device virtio-net,nat,mac=52:54:00:70:2b:71
```

This adds a virtio-net device to the VM, and redirects all the network traffic on the corresponding guest network interface to `/Users/virtuser/virtio-net.sock`:
```
--device virtio-net,unixSocketPath=/Users/virtuser/virtio-net.sock
```
This is useful in combination with usermode networking stacks such as [gvisor-tap-vsock](https://github.com/containers/gvisor-tap-vsock).


### Serial Port

#### Description

The `--device virtio-serial` option adds a serial device to the virtual machine. This is useful to redirect text output from the virtual machine to a log file.
The `logFilePath` and `stdio` arguments are mutually exclusive.

#### Arguments
- `logFilePath`: path where the serial port output should be written.
- `stdio`: uses stdin/stdout for the serial console input/output.

#### Example

This adds a virtio-serial device to the VM, and will log everything which is written to this device to `/Users/virtuser/vfkit.log`:
```
--device virtio-serial,logFilePath=/Users/virtuser/vfkit.log
```

This adds a virtio-serial device to the VM, and the terminal `vfkit` is
launched from will be used as an interactive serial console for that device:
```
--device virtio-serial,stdio
```


### Random Number Generator

#### Description

The `--device virtio-rng` option adds a random number generator device to the virtual machine.
It will feed entropy from the host to the virtual machine, as VMs often do not have many entropy sources.

#### Example

This adds a virtio-rng device to the VM:
```
--device virtio-rng
```


### virtio-vsock communication

#### Description

The `--device virtio-vsock` option adds a virtio-vsock communication channel between the host and the guest
See `man 4 vsock` for more details. macOS does not have host support for
`AF_VSOCK` sockets so the vsock port will be exposed as a unix socket on the
host.

`--device virtio-vsock` can be specified multiple times on the command line to
allow communication over multiple vsock ports. There will only be a single
virtio-vsock device added to the VM regardless of the number of `--device
virtio-vsock` occurrences on the command line.

#### Arguments
- `port`: vsock port to use for the VM/host communication.
- `socketURL`: path to the unix socket to use on the host for the vsock communication.
- `connect`: indicates that the host will connect to the guest over vsock.
- `listen` : indicates that the host will be listening for vsock connections (default).

#### Example

This allows virtio-vsock communication from the guest to the host over vsock port 5:
```
--device virtio-vsock,port=5,socketURL=/Users/virtuser/vfkit-5.sock
```
The socket can be created on the host with `nc -U -l /Users/virtuser/vfkit-5.sock`,
and the guest can connect to it with `nc --vsock 2 5`.


This allows virtio-vsock communication from the host to the guest over vsock port 6:
```
--device virtio-vsock,port=6,socketURL=/Users/virtuser/vfkit-6.sock,connect
```
The socket can be created on the guest with `nc --vsock --listen 3 6`,
and the host can connect to it with `nc -U /Users/virtuser/vfkit-6.sock,connect`.


### File Sharing

#### Description

The `-device virtio-fs` option allows to share directories between the host and the guest. The sharing will be done using virtio-fs.
The share can be mounted in the guest with `mount -t virtiofs vfkitTag /mnt`, with `vfkitTag` corresponding to the value of the `mountTag` option.


#### Arguments
- `sharedDir`: absolute path to the host directory to share with the guest.
- `mountTag`: tag which will be used to mount the shared directory in the guest.

#### Example

This will share `/Users/virtuser/vfkit` with the guest:
```
--device virtio-fs,sharedDir=/Users/virtuser/vfkit/,mountTag=vfkit-share
```

The share can then be mounted in the guest with:
```
mount -t virtiofs vfkit-share /mount
```


### Rosetta

#### Description

The `-device rosetta` option allows to use Rosetta to run x86_64 binaries in an arm64 linux VM. This option will share a directory containing the rosetta binaries over virtio-fs.
The share can be mounted in the guest with `mount -t virtiofs vfkitTag /mnt`, with `vfkitTag` corresponding to the value of the `mountTag` option.
Then, [`binfmt`](https://docs.kernel.org/admin-guide/binfmt-misc.html) needs to be configured to use this rosetta binary for x86_64 executables.
On systems using systemd, this can be achieved by creating a /etc/binfmt.d/rosetta.conf file with this content (`/mnt/rosetta` is the full path to the rosetta binary):
```
:rosetta:M::\x7fELF\x02\x01\x01\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00\x02\x00\x3e\x00:\xff\xff\xff\xff\xff\xfe\xfe\x00\xff\xff\xff\xff\xff\xff\xff\xff\xfe\xff\xff\xff:/mnt/rosetta:F
```
and then running `systemctl restart systemd-binfmt`.

This option is only available on machine with Apple CPUs, `vfkit` will fail with an error if it's used on Intel machines.

See https://developer.apple.com/documentation/virtualization/running_intel_binaries_in_linux_vms_with_rosetta?language=objc for more details.


#### Arguments
- `mountTag`: tag which will be used to mount the rosetta share in the guest.
- `install`: indicates to automatically install rosetta on systems where it's missing. By default, an error will be reported if `--device rosetta` is used when rosetta is not installed.

#### Example

This adds rosetta support to the guest:
```
--device rosetta,mountTag=rosetta-share
```

The share can then be mounted with `mount -t virtiofs rosetta-share /mnt`.


### GPU

#### Description

The `--device virtio-gpu` option allows the user to add graphical devices to the virtual machine.

#### Arguments
- `width`: the horizontal resolution of the graphical device's resolution. Defaults to 800
- `height`: the vertical resolution of the graphical device's resolution. Defaults to 600

#### Example

`--device virtio-gpu,width=1920,height=1080`


### Input

#### Description

The `--device virtio-input` option allows the user to add an input device to the virtual machine. This currently supports `pointing` and `keyboard` devices.

#### Arguments

None

#### Example

`--device virtio-input,pointing`


## Restful Service

### Get VM state

Used to obtain the state of the virtual machine that is being run by VFKit.

GET `/vm/state`
Response: { "state": string, "canStart": bool, "canPause": bool, "canResume": bool, "canStop": bool, "canHardStop": bool }

> `canHardStop` is only supported on macOS 12 and newer, false will always be returned on older versions.

### Change VM State

Change the state of the virtual machine. Valid states are:
* HardStop
* Pause
* Resume
* Stop

POST `/vm/state` { "state": "new value"}

Response: http 200

### Inspect VM

Get description of the virtual machine

GET `/vm/inspect`
Response: { "cpus": uint, "memory": uint64, "devices": []config.VirtIODevice }

## Enabling a Graphical User Interface

### Add a virtio-gpu device

In order to successfully start a graphical application window, a virtio-gpu device must be added to the virtual machine.

### Pass the `--gui` flag

In order to tell vfkit that you want to start a graphical application window, you need to pass the `--gui` flag in your command.

### Usage

Proper use of this flag may look similar to the following section of a command: 
```bash
--device virtio-input,keyboard --device virtio-input,pointing --device virtio-gpu,width=1920,height=1080 --gui
```

Commit message:

Add support for nvme devices
This also seems to avoid the disk corruption that we see
with virtio-blk; it reportedly has a small performance hit
for raw speed, but I think avoiding the double caching (guest and host)
is much better from a performance perspective.

Signed-off-by: Colin Walters <walters@verbum.org>

doc/usage.md, after:

# vfkit Command Line

The `vfkit` executable can be used to create a virtual machine (VM) using macOS virtualization framework.
The virtual machine will be terminated as soon as the `vfkit` process exits.
Its configuration can be specified through command line options.

Specifying VM bootloader configuration is mandatory.
Device configuration is optional, but most VM will need a disk image and a network interface to be configured.

## Generic Options

- `--log-level`

Set the log-level for VFKit.  Supported values are `debug`, `info`, and `error`.

- `--restful-URI`

The URI (address) of the restful service.  The default is `tcp://localhost:8081`.  Valid schemes are
`tcp`, `none`, or `unix`.  In the case of unix, the "host" portion would be a path to where the unix domain
socket will be stored. A scheme of `none` disables the restful service.

### Virtual Machine Resources

These options specify the amount of RAM and the number of CPUs which will be available to the virtual machine.
They are mandatory.

- `--cpus`

Number of virtual CPUs (vCPU) available in the VM. It defaults to 1 vCPU.

- `--memory`

Amount of memory available in the virtual machine. The value is in MiB (mibibytes, 1024 * 1024 * 1024 bytes), and the default is 512 MiB.

### Time Synchronization Configuration

#### Description

When the host system is suspended, the guest clock stops running, and it's unable to get back to the correct time upon resume.
The `--timesync` option can be used to let `vfkit` set the guest clock to the correct time when it detects the host.
At the moment, this can only be done using `qemu-guest-agent`, which has to be installed in the guest.
It must be configured to communicate over virtio-vsock.

#### Arguments
- `vsockPort`: vsock port used for communication with the guest agent.


## Bootloader Configuration

A bootloader is required to tell vfkit _how_ it should be starting the guest OS.

### Linux bootloader

#### Description

`--bootloader linux` replaces the legacy `--kernel`, `--kernel-cmdline` and `--initrd` options.
It allows to specify which kernel and initrd should be used when starting the VM.

#### Arguments

- `kernel`: path to the kernel to use to start the virtual machine. The kernel *must* be uncompressed or the VM will hang when trying to start. See [the kernel documentation](https://www.kernel.org/doc/Documentation/arm64/booting.txt) for more details.
- `initrd`: path to the initrd file to use when starting the virtual machine.
- `cmdline`: kernel command line to use when starting the virtual machine.

#### Example

`--bootloader linux,kernel=~/kernels/vmlinuz-5.18.18-200.fc36.aarch64,initrd=~/kernels/initramfs-5.18.18-200.fc36.aarch64.img,cmdline="\"console=hvc0 root=UUID=164b4fc3-dc5a-40ea-a40b-c689a7bf41cf rw\""`

The kernel command line must be enclosed in `"`, and depending on your shell, they might need to be escaped (`\"`)


### EFI bootloader

#### Description

`--bootloader efi` is only available when running on macOS 13 or newer.
This allows to boot a disk image using EFI, which removes the need for providing external kernel/initrd/...
The disk image bootloader will be started by the EFI firmware, which will in turn know which kernel it should be booting.

#### Arguments

- `variable-store`: path to a file which EFI can use to store its variables
- `create`: indicate whether the `variable-store` file should be created or not if missing.

#### Example

`--bootloader efi,variable-store=/Users/virtuser/efi-variable-store,create`


### Deprecated options

#### Description

The `--kernel`, `--initrd` and `--kernel-cmdline` options are deprecated and have been replaced by the more generic `--bootloader` option.

#### Options

- `--kernel`

Path to the kernel to use to start the virtual machine. The kernel *must* be uncompressed or the VM will hang when trying to start.
See [the kernel documentation](https://www.kernel.org/doc/Documentation/arm64/booting.txt) for more details.

- `--initrd`

Path to the initrd file to use when starting the virtual machine.

- `--kernel-cmdline`

Kernel command line to use when starting the virtual machine.


## Device Configuration

Various devices can be added to the virtual machines. They are all paravirtualized devices using VirtIO. They are grouped under the `--device` commande line flag.


### Disk

#### Description

The `--device virtio-blk` option adds a disk to the virtual machine. The disk is backed by an image file on the host machine. This file is a raw image file.
See also [vz/CreateDiskImage](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/Code-Hex/vz/v3#CreateDiskImage).


#### Thin images

Apple Virtualization Framework only support raw disk images and ISO images.
There is no support for thin image formats such as [qcow2](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Qcow).

However, APFS, the default macOS filesystem has support for sparse files and copy-on-write files, so it offers the main features of thin image format.

A sparse raw image can be created/expanded using the `truncate` command or
using
[`truncate(2)`](https://manpagez.com/man/2/truncate/).
For example, an empty 1GiB disk can be created with `truncate --size 1G
vfkit.img`. Such an image will only use disk space when content is written to
it. It initially only uses a few bytes of actual disk space even if it's size
is 1G.

A copy-on-write image is a raw image file which references a backing file. Its
initial content is the same as its backing file, and the data is shared with
the backing file. This means the copy-on-write image does not use extra disk
space when it's created. When this image is modified, the changes will only be
made to the copy-on-write image, and not to the backing file. Only the
modified data will use actual disk space.
A copy-on-write image can be created using `cp -c` or [clonefile(2)](http://www.manpagez.com/man/2/clonefile/).


#### Arguments
- `path`: the absolute path to the disk image file.
- `deviceId`: `/dev/disk/by-id/` identifier to use for this device.

#### Example

This adds a virtio-blk device to the VM which will be backed by the raw image at `/Users/virtuser/vfkit.img`:
```
--device virtio-blk,path=/Users/virtuser/vfkit.img
```


### NVM Express

#### Description

The `--device nvme` option adds a NVMe device to the virtual machine. The disk is backed by an image file on the host machine. This file is a raw image file.

#### Arguments
- `path`: the absolute path to the disk image file.

#### Example

This adds a NVMe device to the VM which will be backed by the disk image at `/Users/virtuser/image.img`:
```
--device nvme,path=/Users/virtuser/image.img
```


### USB Mass Storage

#### Description

The `--device usb-mass-storage` option adds a USB mass storage device to the virtual machine. The disk is backed by an image file on the host machine. This file is a raw image file or an ISO image.

#### Arguments
- `path`: the absolute path to the disk image file.

#### Example

This adds a USB mass storage device to the VM which will be backed by the ISO image at `/Users/virtuser/distro.iso`:
```
--device usb-mass-storage,path=/Users/virtuser/distro.iso
```


### Networking

#### Description

The `--device virtio-net` option adds a network interface to the virtual machine. If it gets its IP address through DHCP, its IP can be found in `/var/db/dhcpd_leases` on the host.

#### Arguments
- `mac`: optional argument to specify the MAC address of the VM. If it's omitted, a random MAC address will be used.
- `fd`: file descriptor to attach to the guest network interface. The file descriptor must be a connected datagram socket. See [VZFileHandleNetworkDeviceAttachment](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/virtualization/vzfilehandlenetworkdeviceattachment?language=objc) for more details.
- `nat`: guest network traffic will be NAT'ed through the host. This is the default. See [VZNATNetworkDeviceAttachment](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/virtualization/vznatnetworkdeviceattachment?language=objc) for more details.
- `unixSocketPath`: path to a unix socket to attach to the guest network interface. See [VZFileHandleNetworkDeviceAttachment](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/virtualization/vzfilehandlenetworkdeviceattachment?language=objc) for more details.

`fd`, `nat`, `unixSocketPath` are mutually exclusive.

#### Example

This adds a virtio-net device to the VM with `52:54:00:70:2b:71` as its MAC address:
```
--device virtio-net,nat,mac=52:54:00:70:2b:71
```

This adds a virtio-net device to the VM, and redirects all the network traffic on the corresponding guest network interface to `/Users/virtuser/virtio-net.sock`:
```
--device virtio-net,unixSocketPath=/Users/virtuser/virtio-net.sock
```
This is useful in combination with usermode networking stacks such as [gvisor-tap-vsock](https://github.com/containers/gvisor-tap-vsock).


### Serial Port

#### Description

The `--device virtio-serial` option adds a serial device to the virtual machine. This is useful to redirect text output from the virtual machine to a log file.
The `logFilePath` and `stdio` arguments are mutually exclusive.

#### Arguments
- `logFilePath`: path where the serial port output should be written.
- `stdio`: uses stdin/stdout for the serial console input/output.

#### Example

This adds a virtio-serial device to the VM, and will log everything which is written to this device to `/Users/virtuser/vfkit.log`:
```
--device virtio-serial,logFilePath=/Users/virtuser/vfkit.log
```

This adds a virtio-serial device to the VM, and the terminal `vfkit` is
launched from will be used as an interactive serial console for that device:
```
--device virtio-serial,stdio
```


### Random Number Generator

#### Description

The `--device virtio-rng` option adds a random number generator device to the virtual machine.
It will feed entropy from the host to the virtual machine, as VMs often do not have many entropy sources.

#### Example

This adds a virtio-rng device to the VM:
```
--device virtio-rng
```


### virtio-vsock communication

#### Description

The `--device virtio-vsock` option adds a virtio-vsock communication channel between the host and the guest
See `man 4 vsock` for more details. macOS does not have host support for
`AF_VSOCK` sockets so the vsock port will be exposed as a unix socket on the
host.

`--device virtio-vsock` can be specified multiple times on the command line to
allow communication over multiple vsock ports. There will only be a single
virtio-vsock device added to the VM regardless of the number of `--device
virtio-vsock` occurrences on the command line.

#### Arguments
- `port`: vsock port to use for the VM/host communication.
- `socketURL`: path to the unix socket to use on the host for the vsock communication.
- `connect`: indicates that the host will connect to the guest over vsock.
- `listen` : indicates that the host will be listening for vsock connections (default).

#### Example

This allows virtio-vsock communication from the guest to the host over vsock port 5:
```
--device virtio-vsock,port=5,socketURL=/Users/virtuser/vfkit-5.sock
```
The socket can be created on the host with `nc -U -l /Users/virtuser/vfkit-5.sock`,
and the guest can connect to it with `nc --vsock 2 5`.


This allows virtio-vsock communication from the host to the guest over vsock port 6:
```
--device virtio-vsock,port=6,socketURL=/Users/virtuser/vfkit-6.sock,connect
```
The socket can be created on the guest with `nc --vsock --listen 3 6`,
and the host can connect to it with `nc -U /Users/virtuser/vfkit-6.sock,connect`.


### File Sharing

#### Description

The `-device virtio-fs` option allows to share directories between the host and the guest. The sharing will be done using virtio-fs.
The share can be mounted in the guest with `mount -t virtiofs vfkitTag /mnt`, with `vfkitTag` corresponding to the value of the `mountTag` option.


#### Arguments
- `sharedDir`: absolute path to the host directory to share with the guest.
- `mountTag`: tag which will be used to mount the shared directory in the guest.

#### Example

This will share `/Users/virtuser/vfkit` with the guest:
```
--device virtio-fs,sharedDir=/Users/virtuser/vfkit/,mountTag=vfkit-share
```

The share can then be mounted in the guest with:
```
mount -t virtiofs vfkit-share /mount
```


### Rosetta

#### Description

The `-device rosetta` option allows to use Rosetta to run x86_64 binaries in an arm64 linux VM. This option will share a directory containing the rosetta binaries over virtio-fs.
The share can be mounted in the guest with `mount -t virtiofs vfkitTag /mnt`, with `vfkitTag` corresponding to the value of the `mountTag` option.
Then, [`binfmt`](https://docs.kernel.org/admin-guide/binfmt-misc.html) needs to be configured to use this rosetta binary for x86_64 executables.
On systems using systemd, this can be achieved by creating a /etc/binfmt.d/rosetta.conf file with this content (`/mnt/rosetta` is the full path to the rosetta binary):
```
:rosetta:M::\x7fELF\x02\x01\x01\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00\x02\x00\x3e\x00:\xff\xff\xff\xff\xff\xfe\xfe\x00\xff\xff\xff\xff\xff\xff\xff\xff\xfe\xff\xff\xff:/mnt/rosetta:F
```
and then running `systemctl restart systemd-binfmt`.

This option is only available on machine with Apple CPUs, `vfkit` will fail with an error if it's used on Intel machines.

See https://developer.apple.com/documentation/virtualization/running_intel_binaries_in_linux_vms_with_rosetta?language=objc for more details.


#### Arguments
- `mountTag`: tag which will be used to mount the rosetta share in the guest.
- `install`: indicates to automatically install rosetta on systems where it's missing. By default, an error will be reported if `--device rosetta` is used when rosetta is not installed.

#### Example

This adds rosetta support to the guest:
```
--device rosetta,mountTag=rosetta-share
```

The share can then be mounted with `mount -t virtiofs rosetta-share /mnt`.


### GPU

#### Description

The `--device virtio-gpu` option allows the user to add graphical devices to the virtual machine.

#### Arguments
- `width`: the horizontal resolution of the graphical device's resolution. Defaults to 800
- `height`: the vertical resolution of the graphical device's resolution. Defaults to 600

#### Example

`--device virtio-gpu,width=1920,height=1080`


### Input

#### Description

The `--device virtio-input` option allows the user to add an input device to the virtual machine. This currently supports `pointing` and `keyboard` devices.

#### Arguments

None

#### Example

`--device virtio-input,pointing`


## Restful Service

### Get VM state

Used to obtain the state of the virtual machine that is being run by VFKit.

GET `/vm/state`
Response: { "state": string, "canStart": bool, "canPause": bool, "canResume": bool, "canStop": bool, "canHardStop": bool }

> `canHardStop` is only supported on macOS 12 and newer, false will always be returned on older versions.

### Change VM State

Change the state of the virtual machine. Valid states are:
* HardStop
* Pause
* Resume
* Stop

POST `/vm/state` { "state": "new value"}

Response: http 200

### Inspect VM

Get description of the virtual machine

GET `/vm/inspect`
Response: { "cpus": uint, "memory": uint64, "devices": []config.VirtIODevice }

## Enabling a Graphical User Interface

### Add a virtio-gpu device

In order to successfully start a graphical application window, a virtio-gpu device must be added to the virtual machine.

### Pass the `--gui` flag

In order to tell vfkit that you want to start a graphical application window, you need to pass the `--gui` flag in your command.

### Usage

Proper use of this flag may look similar to the following section of a command: 
```bash
--device virtio-input,keyboard --device virtio-input,pointing --device virtio-gpu,width=1920,height=1080 --gui
```
